\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename texinfo.info
@settitle Texinfo Manual
@c %**end of header
@copying
Cheatsheat to Texinfo.

Copyright @copyright{} 2014

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.

A copy of the license is also available from the Free Software
Foundation Web site at @url{http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.

@end quotation

The document was typeset with
@uref{http://www.texinfo.org/, GNU Texinfo}.

@end copying

@titlepage
@title Texinfo Manual
@subtitle Cheatsheat to Texinfo
@author  Joshua Branson
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Texinfo Manual

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Document Structure::
* 6 Parts of Texinfo file::
* Commands::
* Copying This Manual::
* Index::
@end menu

@c Update all node entries with `C-c C-u C-n'.
@c Insert new nodes with `C-c C-c n'.
@node Document Structure
@chapter Document Structure

Texinfo has lots of @@ commands. The @code{@@node} deals with section
for HTML and info, and the @code{@@chapter} is for pdfs and
postscripts. To use the @@, @{, or @} one must put an @@ infront of
them. Like this: @code{@@}

Comments are created by using @code{@@comment} or @code{@@c}.

The first nodes and chapters are the chapters of the text. The nodes
and chapters within a chapter are subchapters.

A texinfo file must include:
@code{\input texinfo}
@code{@@setfilename info-file name}
@code{@@settitle name-of-manual}
...
@code{@@bye}

@node 6 Parts of Texinfo file
@chapter 6 Parts of Texinfo file

@enumerate
@item
Header, which include the settitle and setfilename.

@item
Summary and Copyright contains that copyright notice. This is done
with the @code{@@copying} command.

@item
Title and Copyright only appear in the printed manual. It is between
the @code{titlepage} and @code{end titlepage}

@item
Top Node and Master Menu only appears in the online manual. It
contains the master menu for the html output.

@item
Body the text in your body

@item
End contains the @code{@@bye} command.
@end enumerate

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

'C-c C-c c'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@code'
@noindent
     Insert '@@code@{@}' and put the cursor between the braces.

'C-c C-c d'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@dfn'
@noindent
     Insert '@@dfn@{@}' and put the cursor between the braces.
     @noindent
'C-c C-c e'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@end'
@noindent
     Insert '@@end' and attempt to insert the correct following word,
     such as 'example' or 'table'.  (This command does not handle nested
     lists correctly, but inserts the word appropriate to the
     immediately preceding list.)

'C-c C-c i'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@item'
@noindent
     Insert '@@item' and put the cursor at the beginning of the next
     line.

'C-c C-c k'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@kbd'
@noindent
     Insert '@@kbd@{@}' and put the cursor between the braces.

'C-c C-c n'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@node'
@noindent
     Insert '@@node' and a comment line listing the sequence for the
     'Next', 'Previous', and 'Up' nodes.  Leave point after the '@@node'.

'C-c C-c o'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@noindent'
@noindent
     Insert '@@noindent' and put the cursor at the beginning of the next
     line.

'C-c C-c s'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@samp'
@noindent
     Insert '@@samp{}' and put the cursor between the braces.

'C-c C-c t'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@table'
@noindent
     Insert '@@table' followed by a <SPC> and leave the cursor after the
     <SPC>.

'C-c C-c v'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@var'
@noindent
     Insert '@@var@{@}' and put the cursor between the braces.

'C-c C-c x'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-@@example'
@noindent
     Insert '@@example' and put the cursor at the beginning of the next
     line.

'C-c C-c @{'
@noindent
'M-x texinfo-insert-braces'
@noindent
     Insert '@{@}' and put the cursor between the braces.

'C-c @}'
@noindent
'C-c ]'
@noindent
'M-x up-list'
@noindent
     Move from between a pair of braces forward past the closing brace.
     Typing 'C-c ]' is easier than typing 'C-c @}', which is, however,
     more mnemonic; hence the two keybindings.  (Also, you can move out
     from between braces by typing 'C-f'.)

@node Copying This Manual
@appendix Copying This Manual

@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::  License for copying this manual.
@end menu

@c Get fdl.texi from http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html
@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c texinfo.texi ends here
