\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename git.info
@settitle git
@c %**end of header
@copying
Basic commands for git.

Copyright @copyright{} 2013

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.

A copy of the license is also available from the Free Software
Foundation Web site at @url{http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.

@end quotation

The document was typeset with
@uref{http://www.texinfo.org/, GNU Texinfo}.

@end copying

@titlepage
@title git
@subtitle Basic commands for git
@author  <joshua@arch>
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top git

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Basic Git concepts::
* Copying This Manual::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Update Gitbub Branch
@chapter Update Github Branch

git remote add origin https://github.com/jbranso/<repo_name>.git
git push -u origin master

@c Update all node entries with `C-c C-u C-n'.
@c Insert new nodes with `C-c C-c n'.
@node Basic Git concepts
@chapter Basic Git concepts

@enumerate
@item
@emph{a Repository} is a collection of commits
@item
@emph{the index} is where commits go before they are inserted into the repository
@item
@emph{a working tree} is any directory in your file system that has a repository associated with it. Any directories that have a .git
in them are are working trees
@item
@emph{a commit} is a snapshot of your working tree at some time
@item
@emph{a branch} is the parent of other commits
@item
@emph{a tag} is the thing that describes one commit from another
@item
@emph{master} is the mainline development branch
@item
@emph{Head} is defined by your repository to define what is currently checked out.
@end enumerate

Basic commands
@enumerate
@item
@code{git reset --hard <hash of commit>} will restore a file to the
commit of the hash and will delete any modifications.
@item
@code{git log} will show a list of all the recent commits.
@item
@code{git log} will show you the changes an unstaded file has. So if
you want to produce a diff output, simply modify a file, save it but
do not git add or git commit it, then run @code{git diff > diff.txt}
and you now have a diff output.
@end enumerate

FREAKINGISHLY AWESOME

$ git config credential.helper store
$ git push http://example.com/repo.git
Username: <type your username>
Password: <type your password>

[several days later]
$ git push http://example.com/repo.git
[your credentials are used automatically]


@node Copying This Manual
@appendix Copying This Manual

@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::  License for copying this manual.
@end menu

@c Get fdl.texi from http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html
@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c git.texi ends here
