\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename viper.info
@settitle How to use Emacs Viper
@c %**end of header
@copying
How to use Emacs Viper Mode.

Copyright @copyright{} 2014

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.

A copy of the license is also available from the Free Software
Foundation Web site at @url{http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.

@end quotation

The document was typeset with
@uref{http://www.texinfo.org/, GNU Texinfo}.

@end copying

@titlepage
@title Emacs Viper
@subtitle How to use Emacs Viper Mode
@author  <joshua@arch>
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top How to use Emacs Viper

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Basics::
* Copying This Manual::
* Index::
@end menu

@c Update all node entries with `C-c C-u C-n'.
@c Insert new nodes with `C-c C-c n'.
@node Basics
@chapter Basics

Viper has 4 states

@itemize
@item
@emph{Emacs state} is your basic emacs environment that one is used to. @code{C-z} will take you
to Vi state. Another @code{C-z} will take you back to emacs mode.
@item
@emph{Vi State} is the vi mode that one is used to. @code{i, o, a} will apparently take
you to insert state. Typing @code{:} and then @code{TAB} will show you a list of commands.
In Vi mode, @code{C-\} acts like the meta key, in case you still need to use emacs
commands. @code{u} will let you undo what you just did. Undo can be repeated by the . key.
@code{:help} you give you help on any command. Then you can type @code{i} to search for stuff.
@item
@emph{Insert State} allows one to insert text. @code{ESC} will exit insert mode. By
default, viper does not allow emacs commands in insert state.
@item
@emph{Replace State} Commands like @code{cw} enter replace state. It is similar to insert
state. @code{ESC} will exit replace state.
@end itemize
@node Copying This Manual
@appendix Copying This Manual

@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::  License for copying this manual.
@end menu

@c Get fdl.texi from http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html
@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c viper.texi ends here
